OSU CS325 Analysis of Algorithms project: NP-complete puzzle

Chosen Game: Sudoku is a game played on a grid of size n^2 * n^2, split into n * n sections. A board is partially populated with numbers from 1..n^2 and the goal is to fill the rest of the board with digits 1..n^2 such that no row, column, or section contains duplicate digits. To verify a solution to a completed board, we must iterate through each row, column, and section, checking to see if any number appears more than once

Verification time complexity: My verification algorithm takes an allegedly solved sudoku grid as a parameter. It uses a for loop with two nested loops of size n^2 (n being the length of one square section of the grid, n^2 being the total length of the grid) to iterate down and across the grid, checking conditions that might invalidate the solution (at constant time). After the doubly nested loop is finished, there is one more loop with a nested loop (both of size n) to check conditions within each section of the grid. The total time ends up being n^2 * n^2 * (n^2 + (n * n)) + c where c accounts for each constant time operation within the loops. Dropping redundancies, the time complexity ends up being O(n^6).

Prove decision question is NP-complete: We will prove in two parts: first that the problem is NP by verifying the solution in polynomial time, then by reducing a known NP-complete problem to our sudoku decision problem.

Sudoku solution is NP: Per the description of my verification algorithm above, verifying a solution of sudoku can be done in polynomial time. As such, determining whether a solution to sudoku exists is within NP.

To prove that sudoku solvability is NP-complete, we’ll look at a known NP-complete problem, constructing latin squares, and reduce it to sudoku solvability. Suppose a latin square L with length and width n. Now, suppose a sudoku board L’ with length and width n and sections of length and width n. To solve L’, we must fill in each row, column, and section from 1..n where numbers do not appear twice in any row, column, or section. Assume this to be the case, that we are indeed able to solve the sudoku instance. This solution for any given grid is solvable if and only if it doesn’t have repeated digits in any row or column, the definition of a latin square. So, in order to have a sudoku board that has a solution, the board must be a latin square. In other words, L’ has a solution if and only if L has a solution. This completes our reduction.

As we have proven our two steps, that sudoku solvability can both be verified in polynomial time and that a known NP-complete problem reduces to it, we can conclude that sudoku solvability is NP-complete, as was to be shown.
